How to Live on Twenty-Four Hours a Day by Arnold Bennett, Preface.
This preface, though placed at the beginning as a preface must be, should be read at the
end of the book.
I have received a large amount of correspondence concerning this small work, and many reviews
of it, some of them nearly as long as the book itself, have been printed.
But scarcely any of the comment has been adverse.
Some people have objected to a frivolity of tone, but as the tone is not, in my opinion,
at all frivolous, this objection did not impress me, and had no weightier reproach
been put forward, I might almost have been persuaded that the volume was flawless.
A more serious stricture has, however, been offered, not in the press, but by sundry,
obviously sincere correspondence, and I must deal with it.
A reference to page forty-three will show that I anticipated and feared this disapprobation.
The sentence against which protests have been made is as follows.
In the majority of instances he, the typical man, does not precisely feel a passion for
his business.
At best he does not dislike it.
He begins his business functions with some reluctance, as late as he can, and he ends
them with joy, as early as he can.
And his engines, while he is engaged in his business, are seldom at their full horsepower.
I am assured, in accents of unmistakable sincerity, that there are many businessmen, not merely
those in high positions or with fine prospects, but modest subordinates with no hope of ever
being much better off, who do enjoy their business functions, who do not shirk them,
who do not arrive at their office as late as possible and depart as early as possible,
who, in a word, put the whole of their force into their day's work, and are genuinely
fatigued at the end thereof.
I am ready to believe it.
I do believe it.
I know it.
I always knew it.
Both in London and in the provinces it has been my lot to spend long years in subordinate
situations of business, and the fact did not escape me that a certain proportion of my
peers showed what amounted to an honest passion for their duties, and that while engaged in
those duties they were really living to the fullest extent of which they were capable.
But I remained convinced that these fortunate and happy individuals, happier perhaps than
they guessed, did not and do not constitute a majority, or anything like a majority.
I remained convinced that the majority of decent average conscientious men of business,
men with aspirations and ideals, do not as a rule go home of a night genuinely tired.
I remained convinced that they put not as much but as little of themselves as they conscientiously
into the earning of a livelihood, and that their vocation bores rather than interests
them.
Nevertheless, I admit that the minority is of sufficient importance to merit attention,
and that I ought not to have ignored it so completely as I did do.
The whole difficulty of the hard-working minority was put in a single colloquial sentence by
one of my correspondents.
He wrote, I am just as keen as anyone on doing something to exceed my program, but allow
me to tell you that when I get home at six-thirty p.m. I am not anything like so fresh as you
seem to imagine.
Now I must point out that the case of the minority, who throw themselves with passion
and gusto into their daily business task, is infinitely less deplorable than the case
of the majority, who go half-heartedly and feebly through their official day.
The former are less in need of advice how to live.
At any rate, during their official day of, say, eight hours, they are really alive.
Their engines are giving the full indicated horsepower.
The other eight working hours of their day may be badly organized or even frittered away,
but it is less disastrous to waste eight hours a day than sixteen hours a day.
It is better to have lived a bit than never to have lived at all.
The real tragedy is the tragedy of the man who is braced to an effort neither in the
office nor out of it, and to this man this book is primarily addressed.
But, says the other and more fortunate man, although my ordinary program is bigger than
his, I want to exceed my program too.
I am living a bit.
I want to live more.
But I really can't do another day's work on the top of my official day.
The fact is, I, the author, ought to have foreseen that I should appeal most strongly
to those who already had an interest in existence.
It is always the man who has tasted life who demands more of it.
And it is always the man who never gets out of bed who is the most difficult to rouse.
Well, you of the minority, let us assume that the intensity of your daily money-getting
will not allow you to carry out quite all the suggestions in the following pages.
Some of the suggestions may yet stand.
I admit that you may not be able to use the time spent on the journey home at night, but
the suggestion for the journey to the office in the morning is as practicable for you as
for anybody.
And that weekly interval of forty hours, from Saturday to Monday, is yours just as much
as the other man's, though a slight accumulation of fatigue may prevent you from employing
the whole of your horsepower upon it.
There remains, then, the important portion of the three or more evenings a week.
You tell me flatly that you are too tired to do anything outside your program at night,
in reply to which I tell you flatly that if your ordinary day's work is thus exhausting,
then the balance of your life is wrong and must be adjusted.
A man's powers ought not to be monopolized by his ordinary day's work.
What then is to be done?
The obvious thing to do is to circumvent your ardor for your ordinary day's work by a ruse.
Employ your engines in something beyond the program before and not after you employ them
on the program itself.
Briefly, get up earlier in the morning.
You say you cannot.
You say it is impossible for you to go earlier to bed of a night.
To do so would upset the entire household.
I do not think it is quite impossible to go to bed earlier at night.
I think that if you persist in rising earlier, and the consequence's insufficiency of sleep,
you will soon find a way of going to bed earlier.
But my impression is that the consequences of rising earlier will not be an insufficiency of sleep.
My impression, growing stronger every year, is that sleep is partly a matter of habit and of slackness.
I am convinced that most people sleep as long as they do because they are at a loss for any other diversion.
How much sleep do you think is daily obtained by the powerful, healthy man who daily rattles up your street
in charge of Carter Patterson's van?
I have consulted a doctor on this point.
He is a doctor who, for twenty-four years, has had a large general practice in a large flourishing suburb of London,
inhabited by exactly such people as you and me.
He is a curt man, and his answer was curt.
Most people sleep themselves stupid.
He went on to give his opinion that nine men out of ten would have better health and more fun out of life
if they spent less time in bed.
Other doctors have confirmed this judgment, which, of course, does not apply to growing youths.
Rise an hour, an hour and a half, or even two hours earlier, and, if you must, retire earlier when you can.
In the matter of exceeding programs, you will accomplish as much in one morning hour as in two evening hours.
But, you may say, I couldn't begin without some food and servants.
Surely, my dear sir, in an age when an excellent spirit-lamp, including a saucepan, can be bought for less than a shilling,
you are not going to allow your highest welfare to depend upon the precarious immediate cooperation of a fellow creature.
Instruct the fellow creature, whoever she may be, at night.
Tell her to put a tray in a suitable position overnight.
On that tray, two biscuits, a cup and saucer, a box of matches and a spirit-lamp.
On the lamp, the saucepan.
On the saucepan, the lid, but turned the wrong way up.
On the reversed lid, the small teapot, containing a minute quantity of tea leaves.
You will then have to strike a match.
That is all.
In three minutes the water boils and you pour it into the teapot, which is already warm.
In three more minutes the tea is infused.
You can begin your day while drinking it.
These details may seem trivial to the foolish, but to the thoughtful they will not seem trivial.
The proper, wise balancing of one's whole life may depend upon the feasibility of a cup of tea at an unusual hour.
Signed, Arnold Bennett.
End of Preface.
Yes, he's one of those men that don't know how to manage. Good situation, regular income,
quite enough for luxuries as well as needs. Not really extravagant, and yet the fellow's
always in difficulties. Somehow he gets nothing out of his money. Excellent flat, half empty,
Always looks as if he'd had the brokers in. New suit, old hat. Magnificent necktie, baggy
trousers. Ask you to dinner, cut glass, bad mutton. Or Turkish coffee, cracked cup.
He can't understand it. Explanation simply is that he fritters his income away. Wish
I had the half of it. I'd show him. So we have most of us criticised, at one time or
another, in our superior way. We are nearly all chancellors of the Exchequer. It is the
pride of the moment. Newspapers are full of articles explaining how to live on such and
such a sum, and these articles provoke a correspondence whose violence proves the interest they excite.
Recently, in a daily organ, a battle-rage drowned the question whether a woman can exist
nicely in the country on eighty-five pounds a year. I have seen an essay, How to Live
on Eight Shillings a Week, but I have never seen an essay, How to Live on Twenty-Four
Hours a Day. Yet it has been said that time is money. That proverb understates the case.
Time is a great deal more than money. If you have time, you can obtain money, usually.
But though you have the wealth of a cloakroom attendant at the Carlton Hotel, you cannot
buy yourself a minute more time than I have, or the cat by the fire has.
Philosophers have explained space. They have not explained time. It is the inexplicable
raw material of everything. With it, all is possible. Without it, nothing. The supply
of time is truly a daily miracle, an affair genuinely astonishing when one examines it.
You wake up in the morning, and lo! your purse is magically filled with twenty-four hours
of the unmanufactured tissue of the universe of your life. It is yours. It is the most
precious of possessions. A highly singular commodity showered upon you in a manner as
singular as the commodity itself. For, remark, no one can take it from you. It is unstealable,
and no one receives either more or less than you receive. Talk about an ideal democracy.
In the realm of time there is no aristocracy of wealth and no aristocracy of intellect.
Genius is never rewarded by even an extra hour a day. And there is no punishment. Waste
your infinitely precious commodity as much as you will, and the supply will never be
withheld from you. No mysterious power will say, This man is a fool, if not a knave. He
does not deserve time. He shall be cut off at the meter. It is more certain than consoles,
and payment of income is not affected by Sundays. Moreover, you cannot draw on the future. Impossible
to get into debt. You can only waste the passing moment. You cannot waste tomorrow. It is kept
for you. You cannot waste the next hour. It is kept for you.
I said the affair was a miracle. Is it not? You have to live on this twenty-four hours
of daily time. Out of it you have to spend health, pleasure, money, content, respect,
and the evolution of your immortal soul. Its right use, its most effective use, is a matter
of the highest urgency and of the most thrilling actuality. All depends on that. Your happiness,
the elusive prize that you are all clutching for, my friends, depends on that. Strange
that the newspapers, so enterprising and up-to-date as they are, are not full of how to live on
a given income of time, instead of how to live on a given income of money. Money is
far commoner than time. When one reflects, one perceives that money is just about the
ominous thing there is. It encumbers the earth in gross heaps. If one can't contrive to live
on a certain income of money, one earns a little more, or steals it, or advertises for
it. One doesn't necessarily muddle one's life because one can't quite manage on a thousand
pounds a year. One braces the muscles and makes it guineas and balances the budget.
But if you cannot arrange that an income of twenty-four hours a day shall exactly cover
all proper items of expenditure, one does muddle one's life definitely. The supply
of time, though gloriously regular, is cruelly restricted. Which of us lives on twenty-four
hours a day? And when I say lives, I do not mean exists, nor muddles through. What is
which of us is free from that uneasy feeling that the great spending departments of his
daily life are not managed as they ought to be? Which of us is quite sure that his
fine suit is not surmounted by a shameful hat, or that, in attending to the crockery,
he has forgotten the quality of the food? Which of us is not saying to himself, which
of us has not been saying to himself all his life, I shall alter that when I have a
little more time? We never shall have any more time.
We have, and we have always had, all the time there is. It is the realization of this profound
and neglected truth, which by the way I have not discovered, that has led me to the minute
practical examination of daily time. Expenditure. End of chapter.
But, someone may remark, with the English disregard of everything except the point, what is he driving at with his twenty-four hours a day? I have no difficulty in living on twenty-four hours a day. I do all that I want to do, and still find time to go in for newspaper competitions. Surely it is a simple affair, knowing that one has only twenty-four hours a day, to content oneself with twenty-four hours a day.
To you, my dear sir, I present my excuses and apologies. You are precisely the man that I have been wishing to meet for about forty years. Will you kindly send me your name and address, and state your charge for telling me how you do it? Instead of me talking to you, you ought to be talking to me.
That you exist, I am convinced, and that I have not yet encountered you is my loss. Meanwhile, until you appear, I will continue to chat with my companions in distress, that innumerable band of souls who are haunted, more or less painfully, by the feeling that the years slip by, and slip by, and slip by, and that they have not yet been able to get their lives into proper working conditions.
If we analyse that feeling, we shall perceive it to be, primarily, one of uneasiness, of expectation, of looking forward, of aspiration. It is a source of constant discomfort, for it behaves like a skeleton at the feast of all our enjoyments. We go to the theatre and laugh, but between the acts it raises a skinny finger at us.
We rush violently for the last train, and while we are cooling a long age on the platform waiting for the last train, it promenades its bones up and down by our side, and inquires, O man, what hast thou done with thy youth? What art thou doing with thine age?
You may urge that this feeling of continuous looking forward, of aspiration, is part of life itself, and inseparable from life itself. True. But there are degrees. A man may desire to go to Mecca. His conscience tells him that he ought to go to Mecca.
He fares forth, either by the aid of cooks, or unassisted, he may probably never reach Mecca. He may drown before he gets to Port Said. He may perish ingloriously on the coast of the Red Sea. His desire may remain eternally frustrated.
Unfulfilled aspiration may always trouble him, but he will not be tormented in the same way as the man who, desiring to reach Mecca, and harried by the desire to reach Mecca, never leaves Brixton.
It is something to have left Brixton. Most of us have not left Brixton. We have not even taken a cab to Luggate Circus and inquired from cooks the price of a conducted tour. And our excuse to ourselves is that there are only twenty-four hours in the day.
If we further analyze our vague, uneasy aspiration, we shall, I think, see that it springs from a fixed idea that we ought to do something in addition to those things which we are loyally and morally obliged to do.
We are obliged, by various codes written and unwritten, to maintain ourselves and our families, if any, in health and comfort, to pay our debts, to save, to increase our prosperity by increasing our efficiency.
A task sufficiently difficult, a task which very few of us achieve, a task often beyond our skill. Yet, if we succeed in it, as we sometimes do, we are not satisfied, the skeleton is still with us.
And even when we realize that the task is beyond our skill, that our powers cannot cope with it, we feel that we should be less discontented if we gave to our powers, already overtaxed, something still further to do.
And such is, indeed, the fact. The wish to accomplish something outside their formal program is common to all men who in the course of evolution have risen past a certain level.
Until an effort is made to satisfy that wish, the sense of uneasy waiting for something to start which has not started will remain to disturb the peace of the soul. That wish has been called by many names.
It is one form of the universal desire for knowledge. And it is so strong that men whose whole lives have been given to the systematic acquirement of knowledge have been driven by it to overstep the limits of their program, in search of still more knowledge.
Even Herbert Spencer, in my opinion the greatest mind that ever lived, was often forced by it into agreeable little backwaters of inquiry.
I imagine that in the majority of people who are conscious of the wish to live, that is to say, people who have intellectual curiosity, the aspiration to exceed formal programs takes a literary shape.
They would like to embark on a course of reading. Decidedly the British people are becoming more and more literary. But I would point out that literature by no means comprises the whole field of knowledge, and that the disturbing thirst to improve oneself, to increase one's knowledge, may well be slaked quite apart from literature.
With the various ways of slaking it, I shall deal later. Here I merely point out to those who have no natural sympathy with literature, that literature is not the only well.
Now that I have succeeded, if succeeded I have, in persuading you to admit to yourself
that you are constantly haunted by a suppressed dissatisfaction with your own arrangement
of your daily life, and that the primal cause of that inconvenient dissatisfaction is the
feeling that you are, every day, leaving undone something which you would like to do, and
which indeed you are always hoping to do when you have more time.
And now that I have drawn your attention to the glaring, dazzling truth that you will
never have more time, since you already have all the time there is, you expect me to let
you into some wonderful secret by which you may at any rate approach the ideal of a perfect
arrangement of the day, and by which, therefore, that haunting, unpleasant daily disappointment
of things left undone will be got rid of.
I have found no such wonderful secret.
Nor do I expect to find it, nor do I expect that anyone else will ever find it.
It is undiscovered.
When you first began to gather my drift, perhaps there was a resurrection of hope in your breast.
Perhaps you said to yourself, This man will show me an easy, unfatiguing way of doing
what I have so long in vain wished to do.
Alas, no!
The fact is that there is no easy way, no royal road.
The path to Mecca is extremely hard and stony, and the worst of it is that you never quite
get there, after all.
The most important preliminary to the task of arranging one's life so that one may live
Fully and comfortably within one's daily budget of twenty-four hours is the calm realization
of the extreme difficulty of the task, of the sacrifices and the endless effort which
it demands.
I cannot too strongly insist on this.
If you imagine that you will be able to achieve your ideal by ingeniously planning out a timetable
with a pen on a piece of paper, you had better give up hope at once.
If you are not prepared for discouragements and dissolutions, if you will not be content
with a small result for a big effort, then do not begin, lie down again, and resume the
uneasy doze which you call your existence.
It is very sad, is it not, very depressing and sombre?
And yet I think it is rather fine, too, this necessity for the tense bracing of the will
before anything worth doing can be done.
I rather like it myself.
I feel it to be the chief thing that differentiates me from the cat by the fire.
Well, you say, assume that I embraced for the battle, assume that I have carefully weighed
and comprehended your ponderous remarks.
How do I begin?
Dear sir, you simply begin.
There is no magic method of beginning.
If a man standing on the edge of a swimming-bath and wanting to jump into the cold water should
ask you, How do I begin to jump?
You would merely reply, Just jump, take hold of your nerves and jump.
As I have previously said, the chief beauty about the constant supply of time is that
you cannot waste it in advance.
The next year, the next day, the next hour are lying ready for you, as perfect, as unspoilt,
as if you had never wasted or misapplied a single moment in all your career.
Which fact is very gratifying and reassuring.
You can turn over a new leaf every hour if you choose.
Therefore, no object is served in waiting till next week or even until tomorrow.
You may fancy that the water will be warmer next week.
It won't.
It will be colder.
But before you begin, let me murmur a few words of warning in your private ear.
Let me principally warn you against your own ardour.
Ardour in well-doing is a misleading and a treacherous thing.
It cries out loudly for employment.
You can't satisfy it at first.
It wants more and more.
It is eager to move mountains and divert the course of rivers.
It isn't content till it perspires.
And then, too often, when it feels the perspiration on its brow, it wearies all of a sudden and
dies, without even putting itself to the trouble of saying, I've had enough of this.
Beware of undertaking too much at the start.
Be content with quite a little.
Allow for accidents.
Allow for human nature, especially your own.
A failure or so in itself would not matter if it did not incur a loss of self-esteem
and of self-confidence.
But just as nothing succeeds like success, so nothing fails like failure.
Most people who are ruined are ruined by attempting too much.
Therefore, in setting out on the immense enterprise of living fully and comfortably
within the narrow limits of twenty-four hours a day, let us avoid at any cost the risk of
an early failure.
I will not agree that, in this business at any rate, a glorious failure is better than
a petty success.
I am all for the petty success.
A glorious failure leads to nothing.
A petty success may lead to a success that is not petty.
So let us begin to examine the budget of the day's time.
You say your day is already full to overflowing.
How?
You actually spend in earning your livelihood how much?
Seven hours on the average?
And an actual sleep?
Seven?
I will add two hours and be generous.
And I will defy you to account me on the spur of the moment for the other eight hours.
IV. The Cause of the Troubles
In order to come to grips at once with the question of time expenditure in all
its actuality, I must choose an individual case for examination. I can
only deal with one case, and that case cannot be the average case, because there
is no such case as the average case, just as there is no such man as the average
man. Every man and every man's case is special. But if I take the case of a
Londoner who works in an office whose office hours are from 10 to 6, and who
spends 50 minutes morning and night in traveling between his house door and his
office door, I shall have got as near to the average as facts permit. There are
men who have to work longer for a living, but there are others who do not have to
work so long. Fortunately, the financial side of existence does not interest us
here. For our present purpose, the clerk at a pound a week is exactly as well off
as the millionaire in Carlton House Terrace. Now the great and profound
mistake which my typical man makes in regard to his day is a mistake of general
attitude, a mistake which vitiates and weakens two-thirds of his energies and
interests. In the majority of instances, he does not precisely feel a passion for
his business. At best, he does not dislike it. He begins his business
functions with reluctance, as late as he can, and he ends them with joy, as early
as he can, and his engines while he is engaged in his business are seldom at
their full horsepower. I know that I shall be accused by angry readers of
traducing the city worker, but I am pretty thoroughly acquainted with the
city, and I stick to what I say. Yet in spite of all this, he persists in
looking upon those hours from ten to six as the day, to which the ten hours
preceding them and the six hours following them are nothing but a prologue
and epilogue. Such an attitude, unconscious though it be, of course kills
his interest in the odd sixteen hours, with the result that, even if he does
not waste them, he does not count them, he regards them simply as margin. This
general attitude is utterly illogical and unhealthy, since it formally gives
the central prominence to a patch of time and a bunch of activities which
the man's one idea is to get through and have done with. If a man makes two-
thirds of his existence subservient to one-third, for which admittedly he has
no absolutely feverish zest, how can he hope to live fully and completely? He
cannot. If my typical man wishes to live fully and completely, he must, in his
mind, arrange a day within a day. And this inner day, a Chinese box in a larger
Chinese box, must begin at six p.m. and end at ten a.m. It is a day of sixteen
hours, and during all these sixteen hours he has nothing whatever to do but
cultivate his body and his soul and his fellow men. During those sixteen hours he
is free. He is not a wage earner, he is not preoccupied with monetary cares, he
is just as good as a man with a private income. This must be his attitude, and his
attitude is all-important. His success in life, much more important than the amount
of estate upon which his executors will have to pay estate duty, depends on it.
What? You say that full energy given to those sixteen hours will lessen the
eight? Not so. On the contrary, it will assuredly increase the value of the
business eight. One of the chief things which my typical man has to learn is
that the mental faculties are capable of a continuous hard activity. They do not
tire like an arm or a leg. All they want is change, not rest, except in sleep. I
shall now examine the typical man's current method of employing the sixteen
hours that are entirely his, beginning with his uprising. I will merely
indicate things which he does and which I think he ought not to do, postponing
my suggestions for planting the times when I shall have cleared, as a settler
clears spaces in a forest. Injustice to him, I must say, that he wastes very
little time before he leaves the house in the morning at nine-ten. In too many
houses he gets up at nine, breakfasts between nine-seven and nine-nine-and-a-
half, and then bolts. But immediately he bangs the front door, his mental
faculties, which are tireless, become idle. He walks to the station in a
condition of mental coma. Arrived there, he usually has to wait for the train. On
hundreds of suburban stations every morning you see men calmly strolling up
and down platforms, while railway companies unblushingly rob them of time,
which is more than money. Hundreds of thousands of hours are thus lost every
day simply because my typical man thinks so little of time that it has never
occurred to him to take quite easy precautions against the risk of its loss.
He has a solid coin of time to spend every day. Call it a sovereign. He must
get change for it, and in getting change he is content to lose heavily.
Supposing that in selling him a ticket, the company said, We will change your
sovereign, but we shall charge you three halfpence for doing so. What would my
equivalent of what the company does when it robs him of five minutes twice a day?
You say I am dealing with minutiae. I am, and later on I will justify myself. Now
will you kindly buy your paper and step onto the train? End of chapter.
You get into the morning train with your newspaper, and you calmly and majestically give yourself up to your newspaper. You do not hurry. You know you have at least half an hour of security in front of you. As your glance lingers idly at the advertisements of shipping and of songs on the outer pages, your air is the air of a leisured man, wealthy in time, of a man from some planet where there are
a hundred and twenty-four hours a day, instead of twenty-four. I am an impassioned reader of newspapers. I read five English and two French dailies, and the newsagents alone know how many weeklies, regularly. I am obliged to mention this personal fact, lest I should be accused of a prejudice against newspapers, when I say that I object to the reading of newspapers in the morning train.
Newspapers are produced with rapidity, to be read with rapidity. There is no place in my daily program for newspapers. I read them, as I may, in odd moments, but I do read them, the idea of devoting to them thirty or forty consecutive minutes of wonderful solitude, for nowhere can one more perfectly immerse oneself in oneself than in a compartment full of silent, withdrawn, smothered, and empty.
I cannot possibly allow you to scatter priceless pearls of time with such oriental lavishness. You are not the shah of time. Let me respectfully remind you that you have no more time than I have, no newspaper reading in trains. I have already put by about three-quarters of an hour for use.
Now you reach your office, and I abandon you there till six o'clock.
I am aware that you have nominally an hour, often in reality an hour and a half, in the
midst of the day, less than half of which time is given to eating.
But I will leave you all that to spend as you choose.
You may read your newspapers then.
I meet you again as you emerge from your office.
You are pale and tired.
At any rate, your wife says you are pale and you give her to understand that you are tired.
During the journey home, you have been gradually working up the tired feeling.
The tired feeling hangs heavy over the mighty suburbs of London like a virtuous and melancholy
cloud, particularly in winter.
You don't eat immediately on your arrival home, but in about an hour or so you feel
as if you could sit up and take a little nourishment.
And you do.
Then you smoke seriously.
You see friends.
You potter.
You play cards.
You flirt with a book.
You note that old age is creeping on.
You take a stroll.
You caress the piano.
By Jove, a quarter past eleven.
You then devote quite forty minutes to thinking about going to bed.
And it is conceivable that you are acquainted with a genuinely good whiskey.
At last you go to bed, exhausted by the day's work.
Six hours, probably more, have gone since you left the office.
Gone like a dream.
Gone like magic.
Unaccountably gone.
That is a fair sample case.
But you say it's all very well for you to talk.
A man is tired.
A man must see his friends.
He can't always be on the stretch.
Just so.
But when you arrange to go to the theatre, especially with a pretty woman, what happens?
You rush to the suburbs.
You spare no toil to make yourself glorious and fine raiment.
You rush back to town in another train.
You keep yourself on the stretch for four hours, if not five.
You take her home.
You take yourself home.
You don't spend three-quarters of an hour in thinking about going to bed.
You go.
Friends and fatigue have equally been forgotten.
And the evening has seemed so exquisitely long.
Or perhaps too short.
And do you remember that time when you were persuaded to sing in the chorus of the Amateur
Operatic Society and slaved two hours every other night for three months?
Can you deny that when you have something definite to look forward to at even tide,
something that is to employ all your energy, the thought of that something gives a glow
and a more intense vitality to the whole day?
What I suggest is that at six o'clock you look facts in the face and admit that you are not
tired, because you are not, you know, and that you arrange your evening so that it is
not cut in the middle by a meal.
By so doing you will have a clear expanse of at least three hours.
I do not suggest that you should employ three hours every night of your life in using up
your mental energy.
But I do suggest that you might, for commencement, employ an hour and a half every other evening
in some important and consecutive cultivation of the mind.
You will still be left with three evenings for friends, bridge, tennis, domestic scenes,
odd reading, pipes, gardening, pottering, and prize competitions.
You will still have the terrific wealth of 45 hours between 2 p.m. Saturday and 10 a.m.
Monday.
If you persevere, you will soon want to pass four evenings, and perhaps five, in some sustained
endeavor to be genuinely alive, and you will fall out of that habit of muttering to yourself
at 11.15 p.m.
Time to be thinking about going to bed.
The man who begins to go to bed 40 minutes before he opens his bedroom door is bored.
That is to say, he is not living.
But remember, at the start, those 90 nocturnal minutes, thrice a week, must be the most important
minutes in the 10,080.
They must be sacred, quite as sacred as a dramatic rehearsal or a tennis match.
Instead of saying, sorry, I can't see you, old chap, but I have to run off to the tennis
club.
You must say, but I have to work.
This I admit is intensely difficult to say.
Tennis is so much more urgent than the immortal soul.
Remember Human Nature.
I have incidentally mentioned the vast expanse of forty-five hours between leaving business
at two p.m. on Saturday and returning to business at ten a.m. on Monday.
And here I must touch on the point whether the week should consist of six days or of
seven.
For many years, in fact, until I was approaching forty, my own week consisted of seven days.
I was constantly being informed by older and wiser people that more work, more genuine
living could be got out of six days than out of seven.
And it is certainly true that now, with one day in seven in which I follow no program
and make no effort save what the caprice of the moment dictates, I appreciate intensely
the moral value of a weekly rest.
Nevertheless, had I my life to arrange over again, I would do again as I have done.
Only those who have lived at the full stretch seven days a week for a long time can appreciate
the full beauty of a regular recurring idleness.
Moreover I am aging, and it is a question of age.
In cases of abounding youth and exceptional energy and desire for effort, I should say
unhesitatingly, keep going day in, day out.
But in the average case I should say, confine your formal program, super program I mean,
to six days a week.
If you find yourself wishing to extend it, extend it, but only in proportion to your
wish, and count the extra time as a windfall, not as regular income, so that you can return
to a six-day program without the sensation of being poorer, of being a backslider.
Let us now see where we stand.
So far we have marked for saving out of the waste of days half an hour at least on six
mornings a week, and one hour and a half on three evenings a week, total seven hours and
a half a week.
I propose to be content with that seven hours and a half for the present.
What, you cry, you pretend to show us how to live, and you only deal with seven hours
and a half out of a hundred and sixty-eight?
Are you going to perform a miracle with your seven hours and a half?
Well, not to mince the matter, I am, if you will kindly let me.
That is to say, I am going to ask you to attempt an experience which, while perfectly natural
and explicable, has all the air of a miracle.
My contention is that the full use of those seven and one-half hours will quicken the
whole life of the week, add zest to it, and increase the interest which you feel in even
the most banal occupations.
You practice physical exercises for a mere ten minutes morning and evening, and yet you
are not astonished when your physical health and strength are beneficially affected every
hour of the day, and your whole physical outlook changed.
Why should you be astonished that an average of over an hour a day given to the mind should
permanently and completely enliven the whole activity of the mind?
More time might assuredly be given to the cultivation of oneself, and in proportion
as the time was longer the results would be greater.
But I prefer to begin with what looks like a trifling effort.
It is not really a trifling effort, as those will discover who have yet to assay it.
To clear even seven hours and a half from the jungle is passably difficult, for some
sacrifice has to be made.
One may have spent one's time badly, but one did spend it.
One did do something with it, however ill-advised that something may have been.
To do something else means a change of habits.
And habits are the very dickens to change.
Further, any change, even a change for the better, is always accompanied by drawbacks
and discomforts.
If you imagine that you will be able to devote seven hours and a half a week to serious continuous
effort, and still live your old life, you are mistaken.
I repeat that some sacrifice, and an immense deal of volition, will be necessary.
And it is because I know the difficulty, it is because I know the almost disastrous effect
in such an enterprise that I earnestly advise a very humble beginning.
You must safeguard your self-respect.
Self-respect is at the root of all purposefulness, and a failure in an enterprise deliberately
planned deals a desperate wound at one's self-respect.
Hence I iterate and reiterate, start quietly, unostentatiously.
When you have conscientiously given seven hours and a half a week to the cultivation
of your vitality for three months, then you may begin to sing louder and tell yourself
what wondrous things you are capable of doing.
Before coming to the method of using the indicated hours, I have one final suggestion to make.
That is, as regards the evenings, to allow much more than an hour and a half in which
to do the work of an hour and a half.
Remember the chance of accidents.
Remember human nature.
And give yourself, say, from nine to eleven thirty for your task of ninety minutes.
CONTROLING THE MIND.
People say, one can't help one's thoughts, but one can. The control of the thinking machine
is perfectly possible, and since nothing whatever happens to us outside our own brain,
since nothing hurts us or gives us pleasure except within the brain,
the supreme importance of being able to control what goes on in that mysterious brain
is patent. This idea is one of the oldest platitudes, but it is a platitude whose profound
truth and urgency most people live and die without realizing. People complain of the lack of power to
concentrate, not witting that they may acquire the power if they choose. And without the power to
concentrate, that is to say, without the power to dictate to the brain its task and to ensure
obedience, true life is impossible. Mind control is the first element of a full existence.
Hence, it seems to me, the first business of the day should be to put the mind through its paces.
You look after your body, inside and out. You run grave danger in hacking hairs off your skin.
You employ a whole army of individuals, from the milkman to the pig killer,
to enable you to bribe your stomach into decent behavior. Why not devote a little attention to
the far more delicate machinery of the mind, especially as you will require no extraneous aid?
It is for this portion of the art and craft of living that I have reserved the time,
from the moment of quitting your door to the moment of arriving at your office.
What, I am to cultivate my mind in the street, on the platform, in the train,
and in the crowded street again? Precisely, nothing simpler, no tools required,
not even a book. Nevertheless, the affair is not easy. When you leave your house,
concentrate your mind on a subject, no matter what, to begin with. You will not have gone
ten yards before your mind has skipped away under your very eyes and is lurking around the corner
with another subject. Bring it back by the scruff of the neck. Ere you have reached the station,
you will have brought it back about forty times. To not despair, continue, keep it up. You will
succeed. You cannot by any chance fail if you persevere. It is idle to pretend that your mind
is incapable of concentration. Do you not remember that morning when you received a disquieting
letter which demanded a very carefully worded answer? How you kept your mind steadily on the
subject of the answer, without a second's intermission, until you reached your office?
Whereupon you instantly sat down and wrote the answer.
That was a case in which you were aroused by circumstances to such a degree of vitality
that you were able to dominate your mind like a tyrant. You would have no trifling. You insisted
that its work should be done, and its work was done. By the regular practice of concentration,
as to which there is no secret, save the secret of perseverance, you can tyrannize over your mind,
which is not the highest part of you, every hour of the day, and in no matter what place.
The exercise is a very convenient one. If you got into your morning train with a pair of dumbbells
for your muscles, or an encyclopedia in ten volumes for your learning, you would probably
excite remark. But as you walk in the street, or sit in the corner of the compartment behind a pipe,
or strap hang on the subterranean, who is to know that you are engaged in the most important
of daily acts? What asinine boer can laugh at you? I do not care what you concentrate on,
so long as you concentrate. It is the mere disciplining of the thinking machine that counts.
But still, you may as well kill two birds with one stone, and concentrate on something useful.
I suggest, it is only a suggestion, a little chapter of Marcus Aurelius or Epictetus.
Do not, I beg, shy at their names. For myself, I know nothing more actual,
more bursting with plain common sense applicable to the daily life of plain persons like you and me,
who hate errors, pose and nonsense, than Marcus Aurelius or Epictetus.
Read a chapter, and so short they are the chapters, in the evening,
and concentrated on it the next morning. You will see.
Yes, my friend, it is useless for you to try to disguise the fact. I can hear your
brain like a telephone at my ear. You are saying to yourself,
This fellow was doing pretty well up to his seventh chapter. He had begun to interest
me faintly. But what he says about thinking in trains, and concentration, and so on,
is not for me. It may be well enough for some folks, but it isn't in my line.
It is for you, I passionately repeat. It is for you. Indeed, you are the very man I am aiming at.
Throw away the suggestion, and you throw away the most precious suggestion that was ever offered to
you. It is not my suggestion. It is the suggestion of the most sensible, practical, hard-headed men
who have walked the earth. I only give it to you at second hand. Try it. Get your mind in hand,
and see how the process cures half the evils of life, especially worry, that miserable,
avoidable, shameful disease, worry. End of chapter.
THE REFLECTIVE MOOD. The exercise of concentrating the mind, to which at
least half an hour a day should be given, is a mere preliminary, like scales on the
piano. Having acquired power over that most unruly member of one's complex
organism, one is naturally to put it to the yoke. Useless to possess an obedient
mind, unless one profits to the furthest possible degree by its obedience. A
prolonged primary course of study is indicated. Now as to what this course of
study should be, cannot be any question. There never has been any question. All
the sensible people of all ages are agreed upon it, and it is not literature,
nor is it any other art, nor is it history, nor is it any science. It is the
study of one's self. Man, know thyself. These words are so hackneyed that
verily I blush to write them. Yet they must be written, for they need to be
written. I take back my blush, being ashamed of it. Man, know thyself. I say it
out loud. The phrase is one of those phrases with which everyone is familiar,
of which everyone acknowledges the value, and which only the most sagacious put
into practice. I don't know why. I am entirely convinced that what is more
than anything else lacking in the life of the averaged well-intentioned man of
today is the reflective mood. We do not reflect. I mean that we do not reflect
upon genuinely important things, upon the problem of our happiness, upon the
main direction in which we are going, upon what life is giving to us, upon the
share which reason has, or has not, in determining our actions, and upon the
relation between our principles and our conduct. And yet you are in search of
happiness, are you not? Have you discovered it? The chances are that you
have not. The chances are that you have already come to believe that happiness
is unattainable. But men have attained it, and they have attained it by
realizing that happiness does not spring from the procuring of physical or mental
pleasure, but from the development of reason and the adjustment of conduct to
principles. I suppose that you will not have the audacity to deny this, and if
you admit it, and still devote no part of your day to the deliberate consideration
of your reason, principles, and conduct, you admit also that while striving for a
certain thing you are regularly leaving undone the one act which is necessary to
the attainment of that thing. Now, shall I blush, or will you? Do not fear that I
mean to thrust certain principles upon your attention. I care not, in this place,
what your principles are. Your principles may induce you to believe in the
righteousness of burglary. I don't mind. All I urge is that a life in which
conduct does not fairly well accord with principles is a silly life, and that
conduct can only be made to accord with principles by means of daily
examination, reflection, and resolution. What leads to the permanent sorrowfulness
of burglars is that their principles are contrary to burglary. If they
genuinely believed in the moral excellence of burglary, penal servitude
would simply mean so many happy years for them. All martyrs are happy because
their conduct and their principles agree. As for reason, which makes conduct and is
not unconnected with the making of principles, it plays a far smaller part
in our lives than we fancy. We are supposed to be reasonable, but we are much
more instinctive than reasonable, and the less we reflect, the less reasonable we
shall be. The next time you get cross with the waiter because your steak is
overcooked, ask reason to step into the cabinet room of your mind and consult
her. She will probably tell you that the waiter did not cook the steak and had no
control over the cooking of the steak, and that even if he alone was to blame,
you accomplished nothing good by getting cross, you merely lost your dignity,
looked a fool in the eyes of sensible men, and soured the waiter while
producing no effect whatever on the steak. The result of this consultation
with reason, for which she makes no charge, will be that when once more your
steak is overcooked you will treat the waiter as a fellow creature, remain quite
calm in a kindly spirit, and politely insist on having a fresh steak. The gain
will be obvious and solid. In the formation or modification of principles
and the practice of conduct, much help can be derived from printed books issued
at six pence each and upwards. I mentioned in my last chapter Marcus
Aurelius and Epictetus. Certain even more widely known works will occur at
once to the memory. I may also mention Pascal, La Prière, and Emerson. For
myself you do not catch me travelling without my Marcus Aurelius. Yes, books
are valuable, but not reading of books will take the place of a daily, candid,
honest examination of what one has recently done and what one is about to
do, of a steady looking at oneself in the face, disconcerting though the
sight may be. When shall this important business be accomplished? The
solitude of the evening journey home appears to me to be suitable for it. A
reflective mood naturally follows the exertion of having earned the day's
living. Of course if, instead of attending to an elementary and profoundly
important duty, you prefer to read the paper, which you might just as well read
while waiting for your dinner, I have nothing to say. But attend to it at some
time of the day, you must. I now come to the evening hours. End of chapter.
Interest in the Arts.
Many people pursue a regular and uninterrupted course of idleness in the evenings because
they think that there is no alternative to idleness but the study of literature, and
they do not happen to have a taste for literature.
This is a great mistake.
Of course it is impossible, or at any rate very difficult, properly to study anything
without the aid of printed books.
But if you desire to understand the deeper depths of bridge or of boat sailing, you would
not be deterred by your lack of interest in literature from reading the best books on
bridge or boat sailing.
We must therefore distinguish between literature and books treating of subjects not literary.
I shall come to literature in due course.
Let me now remark to those who have never read Meredith, and who are capable of being
unmoved by a discussion as to whether Mr. Stephen Phillips is or is not a true poet,
that they are perfectly within their rights.
It is not a crime not to love literature.
It is not a sign of imbecility.
The mandarins of literature will order out to instant execution the unfortunate individual
who does not comprehend, say, the influence of Wordsworth on Tennyson.
But that is only their impudence.
Where would they be, I wonder, if requested to explain the influences that went to make
Tchaikovsky's Pathetic Symphony?
There are enormous fields of knowledge quite outside literature which will yield magnificent
results to cultivators.
For example, since I have just mentioned the most popular piece of high-class music in
England today, I am reminded that the promenade concerts begin in August.
You go to them, you smoke your cigar or cigarette, and I regret to say that you strike your matches
during the soft bars of the Lohengrin Overture, and you enjoy the music.
But you say you cannot play the piano or the fiddle or even the banjo, that you know nothing
of music.
What does that matter?
That you have a genuine taste for music is proved by the fact that, in order to fill
his hall with you and your peers, the conductor is obliged to provide programs from which
bad music is almost entirely excluded.
A change from the old Covent Garden days.
Now, surely your inability to perform the maiden's prayer on a piano need not prevent
you from making yourself familiar with the construction of the orchestra to which you
listen a couple of nights a week during a couple of months.
As things are, you probably think of the orchestra as a heterogeneous mass of instruments producing
a confused, agreeable mass of sound.
You do not listen for details, because you have never trained your ears to listen to
details.
If you were asked to name the instruments which play the great theme at the beginning
of the C-minor symphony, you could not name them for your life's sake.
Yet you admire the C-minor symphony.
It has thrilled you.
It will thrill you again.
You have even talked about it, in an expansive mood, to that lady.
You know whom I mean.
And all you can positively state about the C-minor symphony is that Beethoven composed
it and that it is a jolly fine thing.
Now, if you have read, say, Mr. Krebeel's How to Listen to Music, which can be got at
any booksellers for less than the price of a stall at the Alhambra, and which contains
photographs of all the orchestral instruments and plans of the arrangement of orchestras,
you would next go to a promenade concert with an astonishing intensification of interest
in it.
Instead of a confused mass, the orchestra would appear to you as what it is, a marvelously
balanced organism whose various groups of members each have a different and an indispensable
function.
You would spy out the instruments and listen for their respective sounds.
You would know the gulf that separates a French horn from an English horn.
And you would perceive why a player of the hautebois gets higher wages than a fiddler,
though the fiddle is the more difficult instrument.
You would live at a promenade concert, whereas previously you had merely existed there in
a state of batific coma, like a baby gazing at a bright object.
The foundations of a genuine, systematic knowledge of music might be laid.
You might specialize your inquiries either on a particular form of music, such as the
symphony, or on the works of a particular composer.
At the end of a year of 48 weeks of three brief evenings each, combined with a study
programs and attendances at concerts chosen out of your increasing knowledge, you would
really know something about music, even though you were as far off as ever from jangling
the maiden's prayer on the piano.
But I hate music, you say.
My dear sir, I respect you.
What applies to music applies to the other arts.
I might mention Mr. Claremont Witt's How to Look at Pictures, or Mr. Russell Sturges's
How to Judge Architecture, as beginnings, mere beginnings, of systematic vitalizing
knowledge in other arts, the materials for whose study abound in London.
I hate all the arts, you say.
My dear sir, I respect you more and more.
I will deal with your case next, before coming to literature.
Art is a great thing, but it is not the greatest. The most important of all
perceptions is the continual perception of cause and effect. In other words, the
perception of the continuous development of the universe. In still other words,
the perception of the course of evolution. When one has thoroughly got
imbued into one's head the leading truth that nothing happens without a cause, one
grows not only large-minded, but large-hearted. It is hard to have one's
watch stolen, but one reflects that the thief of the watch became a thief from
causes of heredity and environment, which are as interesting as they are
scientifically comprehensible. And one buys another watch, if not with joy, at
any rate with a philosophy that makes bitterness impossible. One loses in the
air which so many people have of being always shocked and pained by the
curiousness of life. Such people live amid human nature as if human nature
were a foreign country full of awful foreign customs. But having reached
maturity, one ought surely to be ashamed of being a stranger in a strange
land. The study of cause and effect, while it lessens the painfulness of
life, adds to life's picturesqueness. The man to whom evolution is but a name
looks at the sea as a grandiose monotonous spectacle, which he can witness
in August for Three Schilling's third-class return. The man who is imbued
with the idea of development, of continuous cause and effect, perceives in
the sea an element which in the day before yesterday of geology was vapor,
which yesterday was boiling and which tomorrow will inevitably be ice. He
perceives that a liquid is merely something on its way to be solid, and he
is penetrated by a sense of the tremendous changeful picturesqueness of
life. Nothing will afford a more durable satisfaction than the constantly
cultivated appreciation of this. This is the end of all science. Cause and effect
are to be found everywhere. Rents went up in Shepherd's Bush. It was painful and
shocking that rents should go up in Shepherd's Bush, but to a certain point
we are all scientific students of cause and effect, and there was not a clerk
lunching at a lion's restaurant who did not scientifically put two and two
together and see in the once too penny tube the cause of an excessive demand
for wigwams in Shepherd's Bush, and in the excessive demand for wigwams the
cause of the increase in the price of wigwams. Simple, you say disdainfully.
Everything, the whole complex movement of the universe, is as simple as that when
you can sufficiently put two and two together, and my dear sir, perhaps you
happen to be an estate agent's clerk and you hate the arts and you want to foster
your immortal soul and you can't be interested in your business because it's
so humdrum. Nothing is humdrum. The tremendous changeful picturesqueness of
life is marvelously shown in an estate agent's office. What? There was a block
of traffic in Oxford Street. To avoid the block people actually began to travel
under the cellars and drains, and the result was a rise of rents in Shepherd's
Bush. And you say that isn't picturesque? Suppose you were to study, in this
spirit, the property question in London for an hour and a half every other
evening. Would it not give zest to your business and transform your whole
life? You would arrive at more difficult problems, and you would be able to
tell us why, as the natural result of cause and effect, the longest straight
street in London is about a yard and a half in length, while the longest
absolutely straight street in Paris extends for miles. I think you will admit
that in an estate agent's clerk I have not chosen an example that especially
favors my theories. You are a bank clerk, and you have not read that
breathless romance disguised as a scientific study, Walter Beghot's
Lombard Street? Ah, my dear sir, if you had begun with that and followed it up
for 90 minutes every other evening, how enthralling your business would be to
you, and how much more clearly you would understand human nature. You are penned
in town, but you love excursions in the country and the observation of
wildlife, certainly a heart-enlarging diversion. Why don't you walk out of
your house door, in your slippers, to the nearest gas-lamp of a night with
a butterfly net, and observe the wildlife of common and rare moths that
is beating about it, and coordinate the knowledge thus obtained, and build
a superstructure on it, and at last get to know something about something?
You need not be devoted to the arts, not to literature, in order to live fully.
The whole field of daily habit and seeing is waiting to satisfy that
curiosity which means life, and the satisfaction of which means an
understanding heart. I promised to deal with your case, O man who hates art and
literature, and I have dealt with it. I now come to the case of the person
happily very common, who does like reading. End of chapter.
Novels are excluded from serious reading, so that the man who, bent on self-improvement,
has been deciding to devote ninety minutes three times a week to a complete study of
the works of Charles Dickens would be well advised to alter his plans.
The reason is not that novels are not serious.
Some of the great literature of the world is in the form of prose fiction.
The reason is that bad novels ought not to be read, and that good novels never demand
any appreciable mental application on the part of the reader.
It is only the bad parts of Meredith's novels that are difficult.
A good novel rushes you forward like a skiff down a stream, and you arrive at the end,
perhaps breathless, but unexhausted.
The best novels involve the least strain.
Now, in the cultivation of the mind, one of the most important factors is precisely the
feeling of strain, of difficulty, of a task which one part of you is anxious to achieve,
and another part of you is anxious to shirk.
And that feeling cannot be got in facing a novel.
You do not set your teeth in order to read Anna Karenina.
Therefore, though you should read novels, you should not read them in those ninety minutes.
Imaginative poetry produces a far greater mental strain than novels.
It produces probably the severest strain of any form of literature.
It is the highest form of literature.
It yields the highest form of pleasure, and teaches the highest form of wisdom.
In a word, there is nothing to compare with it.
I say this with sad consciousness of the fact that the majority of people do not read poetry.
I am persuaded that many excellent persons, if they were confronted with the alternatives
of reading Paradise Lost, and going round Trafalgar Square at noonday on their knees
in sackcloth, would choose the ordeal of public ridicule.
Still, I will never cease advising my friends and enemies to read poetry before anything.
If poetry is what is called a sealed book to you, begin by reading Haslett's famous essay on the
nature of poetry in general. It is the best thing of its kind in English, and no one who has read
it can possibly be under the misapprehension that poetry is a medieval torture, or a mad elephant,
or a gun that will go off by itself and kill it forty paces. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine
the mental state of the man who, after reading Haslett's essay, is not urgently desirous of
reading some poetry before his next meal. If the essay so inspires you, I would suggest that you
make a commencement with purely narrative poetry. There is an infinitely finer English novel,
written by a woman, than anything by George Eliot or the Brontes, or even Jane Austen,
which perhaps you have not read. Its title is Aurora Lee, and its author E. B. Browning.
It happens to be written in verse, and to contain a considerable amount of genuinely fine poetry.
Decide to read that book through, even if you die for it. Forget that it is fine poetry,
read it simply for the story and the social ideas, and when you have done, ask yourself honestly
whether you still dislike poetry. I have known more than one person to whom Aurora Lee has been
the means of proving that, in assuming they hated poetry, they were entirely mistaken.
Of course, if, after Haslett, and such an experiment made in the light of Haslett,
you are finally assured that there is something in you which is antagonistic to poetry,
you must be content with history or philosophy. I shall regret it, yet not inconsolably.
The decline in fall is not to be named in the same day with Paradise Lost, but it is a vastly
pretty thing, and Herbert Spencer's First Principles simply laughs at the claims of
poetry, and refuses to be accepted as ought but the most majestic product of any human mind.
I do not suggest that either of these works is suitable for a tyro in mental strains,
but I see no reason why any man of average intelligence should not, after a year of
continuous reading, be fit to assault the supreme masterpieces of history or philosophy.
The great convenience of masterpieces is that they are so astonishingly lucid.
I suggest no particular work as a start. The attempt would be futile in the space of my command,
but I have two general suggestions of a certain importance.
The first is to define the direction and scope of your efforts. Choose a limited period,
or a limited subject, or a single author. Say to yourself, I will know something about the French
Revolution, or the rise of railways, or the works of John Keats. And during a given period,
to be settled beforehand, confine yourself to your choice. There is much pleasure to be derived from
being a specialist. The second suggestion is to think as well as to read. I know people who read
and read, and for all the good it does them they might just as well cut bread and butter.
They take to reading as better men take to drink. They fly through the shires of literature on a
motor-car, their sole object being motion. They will tell you how many books they have read in a
year. Unless you give at least forty-five minutes to careful, fatiguing reflection,
it is an awful bore at first. Upon what you are reading, your ninety minutes of a night are chiefly
wasted. This means that your pace will be slow. Never mind. Forget the goal, think only of the
surrounding country, and after a period, perhaps when you least expect it, you will suddenly find
yourself in a lovely town on a hill. End of chapter
DANGERS TO AVOID.
I cannot terminate these hints, often, I fear, too didactic and abrupt, upon the full
use of one's time to the great end of living, as distinguished from vegetating, without
briefly referring to certain dangers which lie in wait for the sincere aspirant towards
life.
The first is the terrible danger of becoming that most odious and least supportable of persons,
a prig.
Now a prig is a pert fellow who gives himself heirs of superior wisdom.
A prig is a pompous fool who has gone out for a ceremonial walk, and without knowing
it has lost an important part of his attire, namely, his sense of humour.
A prig is a tedious individual who, having made a discovery, is so impressed by his discovery
that he is capable of being gravely displeased because the entire world is not also impressed
by it.
Unconsciously to become a prig is an easy and a fatal thing.
Hence, when one sets forth on the enterprise of using all one's time, it is just as well
to remember that one's own time, and not other people's time, is the material with
which one has to deal.
That the earth rolled on pretty comfortably before one began to balance a budget of the
hours, and that it will continue to roll on pretty comfortably whether or not one succeeds
in one's new role of Chancellor of the Exchequer of Time.
It is as well not to chatter too much about what one is doing, and not to betray a too
pained sadness at the spectacle of a whole world deliberately wasting so many hours out
of every day, and therefore never really living.
It will be found, ultimately, that in taking care of one's self, one has quite all one
can do.
Another danger is the danger of being tied to a programme like a slave to a chariot.
One's programme must not be allowed to run away with one.
It must be respected, but it must not be worshipped as a fetish.
A programme of daily employ is not a religion.
This seems obvious, yet I know men whose lives are a burden to themselves, and a distressing
burden to their relatives and friends, simply because they have failed to appreciate the
obvious.
Oh, no, I have heard the martyred wife exclaim, Arthur always takes the dog out for exercise
at eight o'clock, and he always begins to read at a quarter to nine.
So it's quite out of the question that we should, etc., etc.
And the note of absolute finality in that plaintive voice reveals the unsuspected and
ridiculous tragedy of a career.
On the other hand, a programme is a programme, and unless it is treated with deference, it
ceases to be anything but a poor joke.
To treat one's programme with exactly the right amount of deference, to live with not
too much and not too little elasticity, is scarcely the simple affair it may appear to
the inexperienced.
And still another danger is the danger of developing a policy of rush, of being gradually
more and more obsessed by what one has to do next.
In this way one may come to exist as in a prison, and one's life may cease to be one's
own.
One may take the dog out for a walk at eight o'clock, and meditate the whole time on the
And the occasional deliberate breaking of one's programme will not help to mend matters.
The evil springs not from persisting without elasticity in what one has attempted, but
from originally attempting too much, from filling one's programme till it runs over.
The only cure is to reconstitute the programme and to attempt less.
But the appetite for knowledge grows by what it feeds on, and there are men who come to
like a constant breathless hurry of endeavour.
Of them it may be said that a constant breathless hurry is better than an eternal dose.
In any case, if the programme exhibits a tendency to be oppressive, and yet one wishes not to
it, an excellent palliative is to pass with exaggerated deliberation from one portion
of it to another, for example, to spend five minutes in perfect mental quiescence between
chaining up the St. Bernard and opening the book.
In other words, to waste five minutes with the entire consciousness of wasting them.
The last, and chiefest danger which I would indicate, is one to which I have already referred,
the risk of a failure at the commencement of the enterprise.
I must insist on it.
A failure at the commencement may easily kill outright the new-born impulse towards a complete
vitality, and therefore every precaution should be observed to avoid it.
The impulse must not be overtaxed.
Let the pace of the first lap be absurdly slow, but let it be as regular as possible.
And having once decided to achieve a certain task, achieve it at all costs of tedium and
distaste.
The gain in self-confidence of having accomplished a tiresome labour is immense.
Finally, in choosing the first occupations of those evening hours, be guided by nothing
whatever but your taste and natural inclination.
It is a fine thing to be a walking encyclopedia of philosophy.
But if you happen to have no liking for philosophy, and to have a like for the natural history
of street-cries, much better leave philosophy alone and take to street-cries.
End of book.
Thank you for listening.